### What you'll need

If you haven't already deployed Gloo and the example swagger service on OpenShift, [go back to the first tutorial](1.md)

Now that we've seen the traditional routing functionality of Gloo (i.e. API-to-service), let's try doing some function routing.

Let's take a look at the upstream that was created for our petstore service:

         glooctl upstream get default-petstore-8080
         
         functions:
         - name: addPet
           spec:
             body: '{"id": {{id}},"name": "{{name}}","tag": "{{tag}}"}'
             headers:
               :method: POST
             path: /api/pets
         - name: deletePet
           spec:
             body: ""
             headers:
               :method: DELETE
             path: /api/pets/{{id}}
         - name: findPetById
           spec:
             body: ""
             headers:
               :method: GET
             path: /api/pets/{{id}}
         - name: findPets
           spec:
             body: ""
             headers:
               :method: GET
             path: /api/pets?tags={{tags}}&limit={{limit}}
         ...
         
We can see there are functions on our `default-petstore-8080` upstream. These functions were populated automatically by
the `function-discovery` pod. You can see the function discovery service in action by running `oc logs -l gloo=function-discovery`

The [function spec](../../v1/upstream.md#Function) you see on the functions listed above belongs to the transformation plugin<!--(TODO)-->. This powerful
plugin configures Gloo's [request/response transformation Envoy filter](https://github.com/solo-io/envoy-transformation)
to perform transform requests to the structure expected byour petstore app.

In a nutshell, this plugin takes [Inja templates](https://github.com/pantor/inja) for HTTP body, headers, and path as its parameters 
(documented in the plugin spec<!--(TODO)--> and transforms incoming requests from those templates. Parameters for these templates 
can come from the request body (if it's JSON), or they can come from parameters specified in the extensions on a route<!--(TODO)-->.

Let's see how this plugin works by creating some routes to these functions in the next section.


<br/>

### Steps

1. Start by creating the route with `glooctl`:

        glooctl route create \
          --path-exact /petstore/findPet \
          --upstream default-petstore-8080 \
          --function findPetById 

    Notice that, unlike the previous tutorial, we're passing an extra argument to `glooctl`: `--function findPetById`.

    Let's go ahead and test the route using `curl`:
    
        export GATEWAY_ADDR=$(oc get po -l gloo=ingress -n gloo-system -o 'jsonpath={.items[0].status.hostIP}'):$(oc get svc ingress -n gloo-system -o 'jsonpath={.spec.ports[?(@.name=="http")].nodePort}')
        export GATEWAY_URL=http://$GATEWAY_ADDR
            
        curl ${GATEWAY_URL}/petstore/findPet

        bad request: Did not found json element: id
 
    What's that? An error? Try again with `curl -v` and you'll see a `400 Bad Request` status on the response.
    
    Looking again at the function `findPetById`, you'll notice the template wants a variable called `id`:
    
         - name: findPetById
           spec:
             body: ""
             headers:
               :method: GET
             path: /api/pets/{{id}}
             
1. Try the request again, but now add a JSON body with the parameter specified by name:

        curl ${GATEWAY_URL}/petstore/findPet -d '{"id": 1}
    
        {"id":1,"name":"Dog","status":"available"}

    Great! We just called our first function through Gloo. 
    
    <br/>

1. Parameters can also come from headers. Let's tell Gloo to look for `id` in a custom header.

    Let's take a look at the route we created:
        
        glooctl route get -o yaml

        Using virtual host: default
        request_matcher:
          path_exact: /petstore/findPet
        single_destination:
          function:
            function_name: findPetById
            upstream_name: default-petstore-8080

    We need to add an `extension` to this route that tells Gloo how to grab template parameters from the request.
    
    Add `parameters` to the route's `extensions` like so:
    
        cat <<EOF | glooctl route update --path-exact /petstore/findPet --upstream default-petstore-8080 --function findPetById --extensions -
        parameters:
          headers:
            x-pet: '{id}'
        EOF
                 
    Now Gloo knows to look for the parameter named `id` in a header called `pet`.
    
    Try `curl` again, this time with the new header:
    
        curl ${GATEWAY_URL}/petstore/findPet -H "x-pet: 1"
    
        {"id":1,"name":"Dog","status":"available"}
    

Tutorials for more advanced use-cases are coming soon. In the meantime, please see our plugin documentation<!--(TODO)-->
for a list of available plugins and their configuration options.