### What you'll need
- [`kubectl`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/install-kubectl/)
- [`glooctl`](https://github.com/solo-io/glooctl)
- Kubernetes v1.8+ deployed somewhere. [Minikube](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/install-minikube/) is a great way to get a cluster up quickly.



<br/>

### Steps

1. Gloo and Envoy deployed and running on Kubernetes:

        kubectl apply \
          -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/solo-io/gloo/master/install/kube/install.yaml

 
1. Next, deploy the Pet Store app to kubernetes:

        kubectl apply \
          -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/solo-io/gloo/master/example/petstore/petstore.yaml

1. The discovery services should have already created an Upstream for the petstore service.
Let's verify this:

        glooctl upstream get
        
        default-petstore-8080
        gloo-system-gloo-8081
        gloo-system-ingress-8080
        gloo-system-ingress-8443

    The upstream we want to see is `default-petstore-8080`. Digging a little deeper,
    we can verify that Gloo's function discovery populated our upstream with 
    the available rest endpoints it implements. Note: the upstream was created in 
    the `gloo-system` namespace rather than `default` because it was created by a
    discovery service. Upstreams and virtualhosts do not need to live in the `gloo-system`
    namespace to be processed by Gloo.

    <br/>
    
1. Let's take a closer look at the functions that are available on this upstream (edited here to reduce verbosity):
    
        glooctl upstream get default-petstore-8080 -o yaml
        
        functions:
        - name: addPet
          spec:
            body: '{"tag": "{{tag}}","id": {{id}},"name": "{{name}}"}'
            headers:
              :method: POST
            path: /api/pets
        - name: deletePet
          spec:
            body: ""
            headers:
              :method: DELETE
            path: /api/pets/{{id}}
        - name: findPetById
          spec:
            body: ""
            headers:
              :method: GET
            path: /api/pets/{{id}}
        - name: findPets
          spec:
            body: ""
            headers:
              :method: GET
            path: /api/pets?tags={{tags}}&limit={{limit}}
        metadata:
          annotations:
            generated_by: kubernetes-upstream-discovery
            gloo.solo.io/service-type: swagger
            gloo.solo.io/swagger_url: http://petstore.default.svc.cluster.local:8080/swagger.json
            kubectl.kubernetes.io/last-applied-configuration: |
              {"apiVersion":"v1","kind":"Service","metadata":{"annotations":{},"labels":{"sevice":"petstore"},"name":"petstore","namespace":"default"},"spec":{"ports":[{"port":8080,"protocol":"TCP"}],"selector":{"app":"petstore"}}}
          namespace: gloo-system
          resource_version: "320962"
        name: default-petstore-8080
        spec:
          labels: null
          service_name: petstore
          service_namespace: default
          service_port: 8080
        status:
          state: Accepted
        type: kubernetes
    
1. Let's now use `glooctl` to create a route for this upstream.

        glooctl route create \
          --path-exact /petstore/list \
          --upstream default-petstore-8080 \
          --prefix-rewrite /api/pets

    We need the `--prefix-rewrite` flag so Envoy knows to change the path on the outgoing request
    to the path our petstore expects. 

    With `glooctl`, we can see that a virtual host was created with our route:

        glooctl virtualhost get -o yaml
        
        metadata:
          namespace: gloo-system
          resource_version: "3052"
        name: default
        routes:
        - request_matcher:
            path_exact: /petstore/list
          single_destination:
            upstream:
              name: default-petstore-8080
        status:
          state: Accepted

1. Let's test the route `/petstore/list` using `curl`:

        export GATEWAY_ADDR=$(kubectl get po -l gloo=ingress -n gloo-system -o 'jsonpath={.items[0].status.hostIP}'):$(kubectl get svc ingress -n gloo-system -o 'jsonpath={.spec.ports[?(@.name=="http")].nodePort}')
        export GATEWAY_URL=http://$GATEWAY_ADDR
            
        curl ${GATEWAY_URL}/petstore/list
        
        [{"id":1,"name":"Dog","status":"available"},{"id":2,"name":"Cat","status":"pending"}]
        
        
Great! our gateway is up and running. Let's make things a bit more sophisticated in the next section with [Function Routing](2.md).
