### What you'll need

If you haven't already deployed Gloo and the example swagger service on kubernetes, [go back to the first tutorial](1.md)

Now that we've seen the traditional routing functionality of Gloo (i.e. API-to-service), let's try doing some function routing.

Let's take a look at the upstream that was created for our petstore service:

         glooctl upstream get default-petstore-8080
         
         functions:
         - name: addPet
           spec:
             body: '{"id": {{pet.id}},"name": "{{pet.name}}","tag": "{{pet.tag}}"}'
             headers:
               :method: POST
             path: /api/pets
         - name: deletePet
           spec:
             body: ""
             headers:
               :method: DELETE
             path: /api/pets/{{id}}
         - name: findPetById
           spec:
             body: ""
             headers:
               :method: GET
             path: /api/pets/{{id}}
         - name: findPets
           spec:
             body: ""
             headers:
               :method: GET
             path: /api/pets?tags={{tags}}&limit={{limit}}
         ...
         
We can see there are functions on our `default-petstore-8080` upstream. These functions were populated automatically by
the `function-discovery` pod. You can see the function discovery service in action by running `k logs -l gloo=function-discovery`

The [function spec](../../v1/upstream.md#Function) you see on the functions listed above belongs to the transformation plugin<!--(TODO)-->. This powerful
plugin configures Gloo's [request/response transformation Envoy filter](https://github.com/solo-io/envoy-transformation)
to perform transform requests to the structure expected byour petstore app.

In a nutshell, this plugin takes [Inja templates](https://github.com/pantor/inja) for HTTP body, headers, and path as its parameters 
(documented in the plugin spec<!--(TODO)--> and transforms incoming requests from those templates. Parameters for these templates 
can come from the request body (if it's JSON), or they can come from parameters specified in the extensions on a route<!--(TODO)-->.

Let's see how this plugin works by creating some routes to these functions in the next section.

### Steps

1. Start by creating the route with `glooctl`:

        glooctl route create \
          --path-exact /petstore/findPet \
          --upstream default-petstore-8080 \
          --function findPetById 

    Notice that, unlike the previous tutorial, we're passing an extra argument to `glooctl`: `--function findPetById`.

    Let's go ahead and test the route using `curl`:
    
        export GATEWAY_ADDR=$(kubectl get po -l gloo=ingress -n gloo-system -o 'jsonpath={.items[0].status.hostIP}'):$(kubectl get svc ingress -n gloo-system -o 'jsonpath={.spec.ports[?(@.name=="http")].nodePort}')
        export GATEWAY_URL=http://$GATEWAY_ADDR
            
        curl ${GATEWAY_URL}/petstore/findPet

        bad request: Did not found json element: id
 
    What's that? An error? Try again with `curl -v` and you'll see a `400 Bad Request` status on the response.
    
    Looking again at the function `findPetById`, you'll notice the template wants a variable called `id`:
    
         - name: findPetById
           spec:
             body: ""
             headers:
               :method: GET
             path: /api/pets/{{id}}
             
1. Try the request again, but now add a JSON body with the parameter specified by name:

        curl ${GATEWAY_URL}/petstore/findPet -d '{"id": 1}
    
        {"id":1,"name":"Dog","status":"available"}

    Great! We just called our first function through Gloo. 
    
    

1. Parameters can also come from headers. Let's tell Gloo to look for `id` in a custom header.

   Let's edit the route directly on our virtual host with `kubectl`:
        
        kubectl edit -n gloo-system virtualhost default
        
    Brings up the editor:
    
        # Please edit the object below. Lines beginning with a '#' will be ignored,
        # and an empty file will abort the edit. If an error occurs while saving this file will be
        # reopened with the relevant failures.
        #
        apiVersion: gloo.solo.io/v1
        kind: VirtualHost
        metadata:
          clusterName: ""
          creationTimestamp: 2018-03-05T21:49:23Z
          generation: 0
          name: default
          namespace: gloo-system
          resourceVersion: "15494"
          selfLink: /apis/gloo.solo.io/v1/namespaces/gloo-system/virtualhosts/default
          uid: 10f5a345-20bf-11e8-80c7-3c42d159c69c
        spec:
          routes:
          - request_matcher:
              path_exact: /petstore/findPet
            single_destination:
              function:
                function_name: findPetById
                upstream_name: default-petstore-8080
          - prefix_rewrite: /api/pets
            request_matcher:
              path_exact: /petstore/list
            single_destination:
              upstream:
                name: default-petstore-8080
        status:
          state: 1
    
    We need to add an `extension` to this route that tells Gloo how to grab template parameters from the request.
    Change the first route from
    
        - request_matcher:
            path_exact: /petstore/findPet
          single_destination:
            function:
              function_name: findPetById
              upstream_name: default-petstore-8080
    
    to the following
     
        - request_matcher:
            path_exact: /petstore/findPet
          single_destination:
            function:
              function_name: findPetById
              upstream_name: default-petstore-8080
          extensions:
            parameters:
              headers:
                x-pet: '{id}'
                     
    Now Gloo knows to look for the parameter named `id` in a header called `pet`.
    
    Save the edited file and try `curl` again, this time with the new header:
    
        curl ${GATEWAY_URL}/petstore/findPet -H "x-pet: 1"
    
        {"id":1,"name":"Dog","status":"available"}
    

Tutorials for more advanced use-cases are coming soon. In the meantime, please see our plugin documentation<!--(TODO)-->
for a list of avaiable plugins and their configuration options.