---
title: 1.0.0+ Upgrade Notice
weight: 80
description: Migrating from Gloo Edge 0.x to Gloo Edge 1.0.0 
---

- [Breaking Changes From 0.x to 1.0.0]({{< versioned_link_path fromRoot="/operations/upgrading/v1.0/#breaking-changes-from-0-x-to-1-0-0" >}})
    - [Breaking Changes Commonly Requiring Manual Action]({{< versioned_link_path fromRoot="/operations/upgrading/v1.0/#breaking-changes-commonly-requiring-manual-action" >}})
    - [All Breaking Changes]({{< versioned_link_path fromRoot="/operations/upgrading/v1.0/#all-breaking-changes" >}})
- [Example Upgrade Process]({{< versioned_link_path fromRoot="/operations/upgrading/v1.0/#example-upgrade-process" >}})
    - [Installing 1.0.0 to a New Namespace]({{< versioned_link_path fromRoot="/operations/upgrading/v1.0/#installing-1-0-0-to-a-new-namespace" >}})
    - [Tearing Down Pre-1.0.0 Installation]({{< versioned_link_path fromRoot="/operations/upgrading/v1.0/#tearing-down-pre-1-0-0-installation" >}})
        - [Removing Cluster-Scoped RBAC]({{< versioned_link_path fromRoot="/operations/upgrading/v1.0/#removing-cluster-scoped-rbac" >}})
- [Helm Compatibility]({{< versioned_link_path fromRoot="/operations/upgrading/v1.0/#helm-compatibility" >}})
- [Gloo Edge Enterprise]({{< versioned_link_path fromRoot="/operations/upgrading/v1.0/#gloo-edge-enterprise" >}})
    - [Enterprise Versioning]({{< versioned_link_path fromRoot="/operations/upgrading/v1.0/#enterprise-versioning" >}})
    - [Enterprise Breaking Changes]({{< versioned_link_path fromRoot="/operations/upgrading/v1.0/#enterprise-breaking-changes" >}})

We have officially released Gloo Edge 1.0.0! This major version bump comes with a number of breaking changes
that you will have to keep in mind as you upgrade from Gloo Edge 0.x to 1.0.0+. While the easiest upgrade 
process is to just start with a totally fresh installation of Gloo Edge, many users are running Gloo Edge in 
production on older versions; this guide is provided for users like them who would like to update to our 
latest and greatest Gloo Edge without any downtime.

# Breaking Changes From 0.x to 1.0.0

##### Breaking Changes Commonly Requiring Manual Action

These breaking changes are common pain points that most users will have to address, and which we specifically
would like to draw attention to. For a complete list of all breaking changes,
see [all breaking changes]({{< versioned_link_path fromRoot="/operations/upgrading/v1.0/#all-breaking-changes" >}}).

   - Route objects (in Virtual Hosts) have had their `matcher` field (see
[here](https://github.com/solo-io/gloo/blob/v0.21.1/projects/gateway/api/v1/virtual_service.proto#L193)
in 0.21.1) changed to `matchers` (see [here](https://github.com/solo-io/gloo/blob/v1.0.0/projects/gateway/api/v1/virtual_service.proto#L188)
in 1.0.0) to support an array of multiple matchers. https://github.com/solo-io/gloo/pull/1353
   - Upstreams have been flattened, entirely removing the `UpstreamSpec` proto message (see
[here](https://github.com/solo-io/gloo/blob/v0.21.1/projects/gloo/api/v1/plugins.proto#L196) in 0.21.1) and moving
all the associated fields into the top-level Upstream (see [here](https://github.com/solo-io/gloo/blob/v1.0.0/projects/gloo/api/v1/upstream.proto#L34) in 1.0.0).
https://github.com/solo-io/gloo/pull/1697
   - The suffix `v2` has been dropped from the `gateway-v2` and `gateway-proxy-v2` deployments, and the Gateway
CRD has had the `.v2` dropped from its name and API group; the
`gateway-resource-reader` RBAC Role has had the corresponding rule on the `gateway.solo.io.v2` API
group removed. https://github.com/solo-io/gloo/pull/1666
   - The route config `auto_host_rewrite` is no longer implicitly set on virtual services that reference static
upstreams. Virtual services referencing static upstreams must now manually set `auto_host_rewrite` to true to preserve
old behavior. https://github.com/solo-io/gloo/pull/1341
   - By default, Gloo Edge now only propagates config from Virtual Services in the same namespace as the referencing Gateway
(compare in [0.21.1](https://github.com/solo-io/gloo/blob/v0.21.1/projects/gateway/api/v2/gateway.proto#L84-L91) to
[1.2.0](https://github.com/solo-io/gloo/blob/696af5be30284847b37b4c9f12ecd42c1c88d433/projects/gateway/api/v1/gateway.proto#L81-L99)).
Note that this is only a breaking change if `virtual_services` and `virtual_service_selector` are omitted on the Gateway.
Configuration to enable `virtual_service_selector` to reference virtual services outside the referencing Gateway's namespace was added [here](https://github.com/solo-io/gloo/pull/1763)
in Gloo Edge 1.2.0.
   - Function Discovery Service (FDS) now defaults to whitelist mode rather than blacklist mode; [FDS config docs]({{< versioned_link_path fromRoot="/installation/advanced_configuration/fds_mode/#configuring-the-fdsmode-setting" >}}).
   - All instances of `...plugins` in our API have been renamed to `options` (e.g., `virtualHostPlugins` -> `options`, `routePlugins` -> `options`).
   - Update ExtAuth secret API to use strongly-typed configuration. OAuth and ApiKey secrets are no longer configured in the opaque extensions block, the same configuration lives at the top level in the api_key and oauth blocks. (https://github.com/solo-io/gloo/issues/1171)

##### All Breaking Changes

{{% expand "Click to see the complete list of breaking changes from 0.x to 1.0.0" %}}
- Rename the Gateway field tcpGateway.destinations to tcpGateway.tcpHosts in order to eliminate the duplicated field names (i.e., tcpGateway.destinations[].destination) (https://github.com/solo-io/gloo/issues/1171)
- Remove deprecated v1 Gateway in favor of v2 Gateway; rename v2 gateway resources to v1. (https://github.com/solo-io/gloo/issues/1171)
- When a Gateway has an empty httpGateway.virtualServices ref list, include all virtual services in the same namespace as the gateway. Previously the behavior was to include all virtual services in the cluster, which is unfriendly to multi-tenant setups. (https://github.com/solo-io/gloo/issues/1142)
- Move the Helm values field "installConfig.installationId" to "global.glooInstallationId" in order to better facilitate usage of the Gloo Edge sub-chart in Gloo Edge Enterprise (https://github.com/solo-io/gloo/issues/1635)
- Remove some deprecated APIs:
    - Remove CorsPolicy from Gateway and Gloo Edge VirtualHost, prefer setting CorsPolicy on VirtualHostPlugins.
    - Remove name from gateway VirtualHost, was previously ignored.
    - Remove bind_addr and circuit_breakers from Settings, prefer gloo.xdsBindAddr and gloo.circuitBreakers on same message. (https://github.com/solo-io/gloo/issues/1171)
- Rename all instances of plugins to options in Gloo Edge's API. This prevents confusion as Gloo Edge "plugins" is really an implementation detail for devs, and Gloo Edge does not currently support dynamically-loaded plugins (aside from ExtAuth plugins).
- Update ExtAuth secret API to use strongly-typed configuration. OAuth and ApiKey secrets are no longer configured in the opaque extensions block, the same configuration lives at the top level in the api_key and oauth blocks. (https://github.com/solo-io/gloo/issues/1171) 
- Refactor the Upstream API to remove the upstreamSpec field, bringing all the fields contained in upstreamSpec up one level to the top-level Upstream. (https://github.com/solo-io/gloo/issues/1171)
- This release changes the names of Gloo Edge's ClusterRoles. By default, cluster-scoped roles will have the namespace of the associated Gloo Edge installation appended to their name (i.e., the cluster-scoped role "gloo-resource-reader" created along with a Gloo Edge installation to the gloo-system namespace will now become "gloo-resource-reader-gloo-system"). This may cause a problem during upgrades from Gloo Edge less than 0.21.0 to Gloo Edge greater than or equal to 0.21.0 for both open-source and enterprise Gloo Edge, as the role ref in a ClusterRoleBinding is immutable. To resolve this, you can delete the existing ClusterRoleBindings with "kubectl delete clusterrolebinding -l app=gloo" and they will be recreated correctly by the rest of the upgrade process. (https://github.com/solo-io/gloo/issues/1459)
- Make FDS default to whitelist mode (https://github.com/solo-io/gloo/issues/1171)
- Flatten prefix rewrite and host rewrite APIs. Move auto_host_rewrite from static upstream to route plugins since it's a route-level Envoy config; this fixes confusing behavior where a single static upstream on a route sets auto_host_rewrite for the entire route. (https://github.com/solo-io/gloo/issues/1171)
- Add support for multiple matchers on a Gateway/Gloo Edge Route to reduce user duplication in yaml/user code. Also allows users to omit matchers on routes (the / prefix matcher will be used) to allow all requests to match the route. (https://github.com/solo-io/gloo/issues/1171)
- Remove deprecated messages from rbac and jwt. (https://github.com/solo-io/gloo/issues/1171)
- Remove deprecated messages from waf. (https://github.com/solo-io/gloo/issues/1171)
- Remove the glooctl --version command in favor of glooctl version (https://github.com/solo-io/gloo/issues/1285)
- Update glooctl to write using the new strongly-typed API. (https://github.com/solo-io/gloo/issues/1171)
- Remove some deprecated APIs:
    - weighed_destination_plugins on WeightedDestinations, prefer weighted_destination_plugins
    - gateway_proxy_name on Gateway, prefer proxy_names
    - role_arns on UpstreamSpec, prefer role_arn
    - Extauth's VhostExtension and RouteExtension, among other minor removals. Prefer configuring Gloo Edge Enterprise ExtAuth using AuthConfig Custom Resources, and configure Virtual Services via ExtAuthExtension to either reference these AuthConfigs or reference your own custom auth implementation using CustomAuth. (https://github.com/solo-io/gloo/issues/1171)
- Proto messages have been updated https://github.com/solo-io/gloo/issues/1171
    - `VirtualHostPlugins` -> `VirtualHostOptions`
    - `RoutePlugins` -> `RouteOptions`
    - `WeightedDestinationPlugins` -> `WeightedDestinationOptions`
    - `ListenerPlugins` -> `ListenerOptions`
    - `HttpListenerPlugins` -> `HttpListenerOptions`
    - `TcpListenerPlugins` -> `TcpListenerOptions`
     
{{% /expand %}}

## Example Upgrade Process

{{% notice note %}}
You should also read our usual upgrade guide (found [here]({{< versioned_link_path fromRoot="/operations/upgrading/upgrade_steps" >}})) and our upgrade FAQ (found
[here]({{< versioned_link_path fromRoot="/operations/upgrading/faq" >}})), both of which may also contain useful tips for performing Gloo Edge upgrades in general.
{{% /notice %}}

In this section, we will walk through the process of upgrading a very simple Gloo Edge installation (running in
minikube) from 0.21.1 to 1.0.0 **without any downtime**. While this will not cover everyone's use case, it will be useful to see how 
to resolve the most common breakages. We will be routing to an instance of [httpbin](https://httpbin.org/)
running in our cluster. Skip to the bottom for all the commands collected in one place.

{{% notice note %}}
This guide will assume that you are running Gloo Edge in the gloo-system namespace.
{{% /notice %}}

{{% expand "Click to see the YAML used to set up the httpbin deployment and VirtualService" %}}
```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: httpbin
  namespace: default
  labels:
    app: httpbin
spec:
  ports:
  - name: http
    port: 8000
    targetPort: 80
  selector:
    app: httpbin
---
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: httpbin
  namespace: default
spec:
  replicas: 1
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: httpbin
      version: v1
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: httpbin
        version: v1
    spec:
      containers:
      - image: docker.io/kennethreitz/httpbin
        imagePullPolicy: IfNotPresent
        name: httpbin
        ports:
        - containerPort: 80

---
apiVersion: gateway.solo.io/v1
kind: VirtualService
metadata:
  name: httpbin-vs
  namespace: gloo-system
spec:
  virtualHost:
    domains:
    - '*'
    routes:
    - matcher:
        prefix: /
      routeAction:
        single:
          upstream:
            name: default-httpbin-8000
            namespace: gloo-system
```
{{% /expand %}}

We can see that we are running 0.21.1:

```shell script
~ > glooctl version
Client: {"version":"0.21.1"}
Server: {"type":"Gateway","kubernetes":{"containers":[{"Tag":"0.21.1","Name":"discovery","Registry":"quay.io/solo-io"},{"Tag":"0.21.1","Name":"gloo-envoy-wrapper","Registry":"quay.io/solo-io"},{"Tag":"0.21.1","Name":"gateway","Registry":"quay.io/solo-io"},{"Tag":"0.21.1","Name":"gloo","Registry":"quay.io/solo-io"}],"namespace":"gloo-system"}}
```

And we can successfully curl httpbin through Envoy:

```shell script
~ > curl -s $(glooctl proxy url)/status/418 # https://httpstatuses.com/418
    
        -=[ teapot ]=-
    
           _...._
         .'  _ _ `.
        | ."` ^ `". _,
        \_;`"---"`|//
          |       ;/
          \_     _/
            `"""`
```

### Installing 1.0.0 to a New Namespace

Now we start the upgrade process. Before we begin, we may want to dump the current Gloo Edge state to a file.

```shell script
~ > glooctl debug yaml > gloo-state-backup.yaml
```

You'll want to save a copy of your pre-1.0.0 `glooctl` somewhere locally, then upgrade the binary.

```shell script
~ > cp $(which glooctl) ./glooctl-v0.21.1
~ > glooctl upgrade --release=v1.0.0
downloading glooctl-darwin-amd64 from release tag v1.0.0
successfully downloaded and installed glooctl version v1.0.0 to /usr/local/bin/glooctl
``` 

Create a new namespace for the 1.0.0 installation, and install 

```shell script
~ > kubectl create ns gloo-system-1-0-0
namespace/gloo-system-1-0-0 created
```

Create a Helm values overrides file to use during the installation:

```shell script
echo "settings:
  # explicitly setting watch namespaces will prevent the 1.0.0 installation from seeing old resources
  # this assumes that all of your pre-1.0.0 upstreams have been written in gloo-system
  watchNamespaces:
  - gloo-system-1-0-0
  - default
global:
  glooRbac:
    nameSuffix: 1-0-0-installation
" > 1.0.0-upgrade-values.yaml
```

And use it when installing to the new namespace:

```shell script
~ > glooctl -n gloo-system-1-0-0 install gateway --values 1.0.0-upgrade-values.yaml # ignore the version warning- we are in the middle of resolving it :)
----------
WARNING: glooctl@v1.0.0 has a different major version than the following server containers: discovery@v0.21.1, gloo-envoy-wrapper@v0.21.1, gateway@v0.21.1, gloo@v0.21.1

Consider running:
./glooctl-1.0.0 upgrade --release=v0.21.1
----------

Starting Gloo Edge installation...
Installing CRDs...
Preparing namespace and other pre-install tasks...
Installing...

Gloo Edge was successfully installed!
```

Re-create your Virtual Services in the new namespace. You will have to edit your Virtual Services to 
accommodate the `matcher` -> `matchers` change. An example diff of the Virtual Service in the snippet above is:

```shell script
~ > diff -u 0.x-vs.yaml 1.0-compliant-vs.yaml
  --- 0.x-vs.yaml
  +++ 1.0-compliant-vs.yaml
  @@ -8,8 +8,8 @@
       domains:
       - '*'
       routes:
  -    - matcher:
  -        prefix: /
  +    - matchers:
  +      - prefix: /
         routeAction:
           single:
             upstream:
```

Let's run `glooctl check` to be sure that our new installation is viable:

```shell script
~ > glooctl -n gloo-system-1-0-0 check
Checking deployments... OK
Checking pods... OK
Checking upstreams... OK
Checking upstream groups... OK
Checking secrets... OK
Checking virtual services... OK
Checking gateways... OK
Checking proxies... OK
No problems detected.
```

You should now be able to direct traffic to the new deployment:

```shell script
~ > curl -s $(glooctl proxy url -n gloo-system-1-0-0)/status/418

    -=[ teapot ]=-

       _...._
     .'  _ _ `.
    | ."` ^ `". _,
    \_;`"---"`|//
      |       ;/
      \_     _/
        `"""`
```

Let's verify that the old installation continues to work. You'll have to use your pre-1.0.0 copy of the
`glooctl` binary:

```shell script
~ > curl -s $(./glooctl-v0.21.1 proxy url -n gloo-system)/status/418

    -=[ teapot ]=-

       _...._
     .'  _ _ `.
    | ."` ^ `". _,
    \_;`"---"`|//
      |       ;/
      \_     _/
        `"""`
```

Now you may tear down the old, pre-1.0.0 namespace at your convenience. Note that once it is torn down, you
may change your new installation's watch namespaces to be whatever you would like, as all pre-1.0.0 resources
should be deleted by that point.

Congratulations! You've just performed a major Gloo Edge upgrade without incurring any downtime.

### Tearing Down Pre-1.0.0 Installation

{{% notice warning %}}
If you run `glooctl uninstall -n gloo-system --all` to attempt to clear out all resources including the cluster-scoped resources, you
will also delete the resources from your new 1.0.0 installation, and Gloo Edge may experience downtime.
{{% /notice %}}

You may delete the deprecated v2 Gateway CRD:

```shell script
~ > kubectl delete crd gateways.gateway.solo.io.v2
customresourcedefinition.apiextensions.k8s.io "gateways.gateway.solo.io.v2" deleted
```

And then run the base uninstall, using the saved `glooctl binary`.

```shell script
~ > ./glooctl-v0.21.1 uninstall -n gloo-system
Uninstalling Gloo Edge...
Removing gloo, installation ID fuUIUbgiVrUAGur42069
Removing Gloo Edge system components from namespace gloo-system...

Gloo Edge was successfully uninstalled.
```

#### Removing Cluster-Scoped RBAC

Older versions of `glooctl uninstall` will not remove cluster-scoped RBAC. Since we set `globals.glooRbac.nameSuffix`
in our 1.0.0 installation values file, you may remove any ClusterRole or ClusterRoleBinding that DOES have the label
`app=gloo` and whose name does NOT have the suffix we set in that Helm value.

## Helm Compatibility

There are several points to consider about Helm compatibility if you are upgrading Gloo Edge (open source or enterprise)
across the 0.x to 1.x boundary:

* Helm 2 **IS NOT** compatible with the Open Source Gloo Edge chart in Gloo Edge versions v1.2.0 through v1.2.2.
* However, Helm 2 **IS** compatible with all stable versions of the Gloo Edge Enterprise chart.
* `glooctl` prior to v1.2.0 cannot be used to install open source Gloo Edge v1.2.0 and later or Gloo Edge Enterprise v1.2.0 and later.

## Gloo Edge Enterprise

Gloo Edge Enterprise also had a 1.x.y major release! If you are a Gloo Edge Enterprise user, please consult both this section
and the rest of the document (covering open source features), as the entire document will be relevant to you.

### Enterprise Versioning

You may notice that Gloo Edge Enterprise has released directly to 1.2.0 from 0.x. This is because we keep the major/minor
versions of Open Source Gloo Edge and Gloo Edge Enterprise in sync, and Open Source Gloo Edge has progressed to 1.2.x. 

### Enterprise Breaking Changes

Since Enterprise is a superset of Open Source Gloo Edge, you should also consult the comprehensive list of
[all breaking changes]({{< versioned_link_path fromRoot="/operations/upgrading/v1.0/#all-breaking-changes" >}}) within Open Source
Gloo Edge if you are upgrading Enterprise from 0.x to >=1.2.0. 

In addition to the open source breaking changes, Gloo Edge Enterprise 1.2.0 also includes the following breaking changes:

- Remove some deprecated APIs:
    - `weighed_destination_plugins` on `WeightedDestinations`, prefer `weighted_destination_options`
    - `gateway_proxy_name` on `Gateway`, prefer `proxy_names`
    - `role_arns` on UpstreamSpec, prefer `role_arn`
    - Extauth's `VhostExtension` and `RouteExtension`, among other minor removals. Prefer configuring Gloo Edge Enterprise ExtAuth 
using AuthConfig Custom Resources, and configure Virtual Services via `ExtAuthExtension` to either reference these `AuthConfig`s
or reference your own custom auth implementation using `CustomAuth`. (https://github.com/solo-io/gloo/issues/1171)
