---
title: 1.11.0+ Upgrade Notice
weight: 40
description: Upgrading to Gloo Edge 1.11.x and Gloo Edge Enterprise 1.11.x
---

Review the changes in Gloo Edge 1.11.x and Gloo Edge Enterprise 1.11.x, and apply the version-specific changes before upgrading your Gloo Edge installation.

{{% notice warning %}}
New CRDs are automatically applied to your cluster when performing a `helm install` operation.
However, they are not applied when performing an `helm upgrade` operation. This is a [deliberate design choice](https://helm.sh/docs/topics/charts/#limitations-on-crds) on the part of the
Helm maintainers, given the risk associated with changing CRDs. Given this limitation, you must apply new CRDs to the cluster before upgrading.
{{% /notice %}}

## Helm changes

In Gloo Edge v1.11.20 / Gloo Edge Enterprise v1.11.27 and later, the default Gateways, ExtAuth Upstreams, and RateLimit Upstreams are installed via a Job during the Helm installation and upgrade process, instead of being included directly in the Helm chart. After you upgrade to these versions, those resources no longer have Helm annotations (e.g. `meta.helm.sh/release-name`, `meta.helm.sh/release-namespace`). If you need to roll back to an earlier Gloo Edge version, you must manually add the Helm release annotations back to these resources before performing the rollback.

{{% notice warning %}}
Do not manually edit (e.g. `kubectl apply` or `kubectl edit`) the Gloo Edge custom resources (e.g. Gateways, Upstreams) that are installed with the Helm chart, as this might cause errors in future upgrades.
<br/><br/>
If you already manually edited a resource, verify _before_ you upgrade that the resource's `metadata.annotations.kubectl.kubernetes.io/last-applied-configuration` annotation does not contain a `resourceVersion` field. This field can cause conflicts during the upgrade process.
<br/><br/>
If the field exists, you can remove it in either of the following ways:
- `kubectl edit` the resource and manually delete the `resourceVersion` field from the `metadata.annotations.kubectl.kubernetes.io/last-applied-configuration` annotation, or
- remove the `metadata.annotations.kubectl.kubernetes.io/last-applied-configuration` annotation altogether if not needed, e.g. `kubectl annotate gateway -n gloo-system gateway-proxy kubectl.kubernetes.io/last-applied-configuration-`
{{% /notice %}}

## CRD changes

**New and updated CRDs**
- In the ExtAuth CR, the `spec.configs.oauth2.oidcAuthorizationCode.clientSecretRef` now requires secrets of `type: extauth.solo.io/oauth`. For more information, see the [OAuth configuration guide]({{% versioned_link_path fromRoot="/guides/security/auth/extauth/oauth/#configuration-format" %}}).
- The GraphQL CR is renamed to `GraphQLApi` (as of release 1.11.0-beta16), and its version has been changed from `v1alpha1` to `v1beta1` (as of release 1.11.0).
- The Settings CR is updated to include [`consoleOptions` configuration settings]({{% versioned_link_path fromRoot="/reference/api/github.com/solo-io/gloo/projects/gloo/api/v1/settings.proto.sk/#consoleoptions" %}}) for the Gloo Enterprise UI.
- The names of the Gloo Edge snapshot emitter metrics are changed to the format `api_gloosnapshot_gloo_solo_io_emitter_*`. For example, the previous metric `api_gloo_solo_io_emitter_resources_in` is now updated to `api_gloosnapshot_gloo_solo_io_emitter_resources_in`.

**Deprecated CRDs**
None

**Removed CRDs**
- The previous GraphQL CR name, `GraphQLSchema` (as referenced in the [1.10 upgrade guide]({{% versioned_link_path fromRoot="/operations/upgrading/v1.10/#installing-the-new-graphqlschema-crd" %}})), is removed.

## Upgrade steps

To upgrade Gloo Edge:

1. Follow the steps in [Upgrade Steps]({{% versioned_link_path fromRoot="/operations/upgrading/upgrade_steps/" %}}) to prepare for upgrading, and to upgrade `glooctl`.

2. If you use OAuth, update your `AuthConfig` resource configuration. Follow the [OAuth configuration guide]({{% versioned_link_path fromRoot="/guides/security/auth/extauth/oauth/#configuration-format" %}}) to generate a secret of `type: extauth.solo.io/oauth` and reference that secret in the `spec.configs.oauth2.oidcAuthorizationCode.clientSecretRef` field.

3. Delete the removed/outdated CRDs (if applicable).
   ```sh
   kubectl delete crd graphqlschemas.graphql.gloo.solo.io
   kubectl delete crd graphqlapis.graphql.gloo.solo.io
   ```

4. Apply the new and updated CRDs. Replace the version with the specific patch version that you are upgrading to.

   {{< tabs >}}
   {{% tab name="Gloo Edge" %}}
   ```sh
   helm repo update
   helm pull gloo/gloo --version 1.11.0 --untar
   kubectl apply -f gloo/crds
   ```
   {{% /tab %}}
   {{% tab name="Gloo Edge Enterprise" %}}
   ```sh
   helm repo update
   helm pull glooe/gloo-ee --version 1.11.0 --untar
   kubectl apply -f gloo-ee/charts/gloo/crds
   # If Gloo Federation is enabled
   kubectl apply -f gloo-ee/charts/gloo-fed/crds
   ```
   {{% /tab %}}
   {{< /tabs >}}

5. Continue to [upgrade the Gloo Edge server components]({{% versioned_link_path fromRoot="/operations/upgrading/upgrade_steps/#step-4-upgrade-gloo-edge" %}}) via Helm.

6. Gloo Federation only: Due to the addition of the GraphQLApi CRD in v1.11, the Gloo Federation ClusterRole in each registered cluster must be updated with new permissions. To do so, follow the instructions to [re-register]({{< versioned_link_path fromRoot="/guides/gloo_federation/cluster_registration/" >}}) each of your clusters.
