---
title: 1.13.0+ Upgrade Notice
weight: 38
description: Upgrading to Gloo Edge 1.13.x and Gloo Edge Enterprise 1.13.x
---

Review and apply version-specific changes in Gloo Edge 1.13.x and Gloo Edge Enterprise 1.13.x before upgrading your Gloo Edge installation.


{{% notice note %}}
This upgrade notice summarizes the main feature, Helm, CRD, and CLI changes for you before upgrading to version 1.13. For more details on particular changes, see the [Changelog]({{% versioned_link_path fromRoot="/reference/changelog/" %}}).
{{% /notice %}}

## Feature changes {#features}

Review the following highlights of features changes in Gloo Edge version 1.13.

**New or improved features**:
* **New! Aerospike integration**: Now, you can use Aerospike as the backing database for your rate limiting or external auth servers. You must configure Aerospike when you install these servers. The default Redis backing database is unchanged. For more information, see the [rate limiting]({{% versioned_link_path fromRoot="/guides/security/rate_limiting/enterprise/" %}}) or [external auth]({{% versioned_link_path fromRoot="/reference/api/github.com/solo-io/gloo/projects/gloo/api/v1/enterprise/options/extauth/v1/extauth.proto.sk/#aerospikeapikeystorage" %}}) docs.

* **New! Canary upgrades for Gloo Edge Federation**: Now, you can upgrade your Gloo Edge Federation installation in a canary model. For more information, see [Canary Upgrade]({{% versioned_link_path fromRoot="/operations/upgrading/canary/" %}}).

* **Improved config validation**: By default, Gloo Edge checks the configuration of Gloo custom resources to prevent invalid config. Now, configuration validation is also automatically checked for add-ons such as rate limiting and external auth custom resources. For more information, see [Config Reporting & Validation]({{% versioned_link_path fromRoot="/guides/traffic_management/configuration_validation/" %}}).

* **Leader election**: Now, the Gloo Edge control plane deployment supports leader election for multiple replicas of the `gloo` deployment. This way, the `gloo` control plane and its components, such as the Gloo Edge xDS server, are more highly available by default. During the installation, one of the gloo pods is elected leader. If the elected leader pod fails due to networking, configuration, or other issues, a new leader is elected among the remaining `gloo` pods. If you previously used xDS relay to provide high availability for the xDS server, you can uninstall that component and use the built-in replica support for the `gloo` deployment. To run only one replica of `gloo`, you can disable leader election by setting the `gloo.disableLeaderElection` value to `true`.

**Deprecated features**:
* **xDS relay**: With the introduction of leader election for the Gloo Edge control plane, xDS relay is no longer needed to increase the availability of the xDS server. Previously, the xDS relay was a beta feature in Gloo Edge 1.11 or 1.12, and not available for non-default installation modes of Gloo Edge, such as REST Endpoint Discovery (EDS), mTLS, or Istio mTLS modes.

**Removed features**:
* None

## Helm changes {#helm}

**New Helm fields**:
* To enable the Aerospike integration, you can use several new Helm fields. For more information, see the [docs]({{% versioned_link_path fromRoot="/guides/security/rate_limiting/enterprise/#aerospike" %}}).
* To prevent sync issues due to network connectivity glitches, you can set TCP keepalive durations during installation with the `gatewayProxies.NAME.tcpKeepaliveTimeSeconds` field. For more information, see [the Knowledge Base help article](https://support.solo.io/hc/en-us/articles/12066701909524).
* When you run [multiple instances of Gloo Edge]({{% versioned_link_path fromRoot="/installation/advanced_configuration/multiple-gloo-installs/" %}}), you must set the `gloo.disableLeaderElection` value to `false`.
* You can now configure `groupLookupSettings` for [LDAP external auth policies]({{% versioned_link_path fromRoot="/reference/api/github.com/solo-io/gloo/projects/gloo/api/v1/enterprise/options/extauth/v1/extauth.proto.sk/" %}}).
* You can now set `circuitBreakers` settings in the Helm chart.
* You can enable liveness probes (`livenessProbe`) for the rate limiter and external auth Helm charts.
* In the rate limiter Helm chart, you can now set `redis.clustered` to enable clustered mode. 

**Deprecated Helm fields**:
* None

**Removed Helm fields**:
* None

## CRD changes {#crd}

{{% notice warning %}}
New CRDs are automatically applied to your cluster when performing a `helm install` operation. However, they are not applied when performing an `helm upgrade` operation. This is a [deliberate design choice](https://helm.sh/docs/topics/charts/#limitations-on-crds) on the part of the Helm maintainers, given the risk associated with changing CRDs. Given this limitation, you must apply new CRDs to the cluster before upgrading.
{{% /notice %}}

**New and updated CRDs**:
* You can set `base_interval` and `max_interval` fields for [retry policies]({{% versioned_link_path fromRoot="/reference/api/github.com/solo-io/gloo/projects/gloo/api/v1/options/retries/retries.proto.sk/" %}}) in gateway, virtual service, and route resources.
* You can set [`maxStreamDuration` as an option]({{% versioned_link_path fromRoot="/reference/api/github.com/solo-io/gloo/projects/gloo/api/v1/options.proto.sk/#maxstreamduration" %}}).
* You can set [`edsBlockingQueries` in the ConsulUpstreamDiscoveryConfiguration settings]({{% versioned_link_path fromRoot="/reference/api/github.com/solo-io/gloo/projects/gloo/api/v1/settings.proto.sk/" %}}).
* Federated resources have new status fields. You do not need to configure these fields.

**Deprecated CRDs**:
* The `IgnoreProxyValidationFailure` flag is deprecated because the Gloo Edge validation webhook now validates rate limit configuration by default.

**Removed CRDs**:
* None

## CLI changes

**New CLI commands or options**:
* The `glooctl check` [command]({{% versioned_link_path fromRoot="/reference/cli/glooctl_check/" %}}) has two new flags:
  * `--resource-namespace`: Set the namespace to check custom resources in.
  * `--pod-selector`: Set the labels for the pods to check in the installation namespace.

**Changed behavior**:
* The `glooctl install gateway enterprise` [command]({{% versioned_link_path fromRoot="/reference/cli/glooctl_install_gateway_enterprise/" %}}) requires a license key to succeed.

## Upgrade process {#upgrade}

The following steps describe the general process for upgrading Gloo Edge. 

{{% notice tip %}}
Want to test the new version before upgrading? Try out a [Canary Upgrade]({{% versioned_link_path fromRoot="/operations/upgrading/canary/" %}}).
{{% /notice %}}

1. Follow steps 1 - 2 in [Upgrade Steps]({{% versioned_link_path fromRoot="/operations/upgrading/upgrade_steps/" %}}) to prepare for upgrading, and to upgrade `glooctl`.

2. Apply the new and updated CRDs. Replace the version with the specific patch version that you are upgrading to, such as `1.13.0` in the following examples.

   {{< tabs >}}
   {{% tab name="Gloo Edge" %}}
   ```sh
   helm repo update
   helm pull gloo/gloo --version 1.13.0 --untar
   kubectl apply -f gloo/crds
   ```
   {{% /tab %}}
   {{% tab name="Gloo Edge Enterprise" %}}
   ```sh
   helm repo update
   helm pull glooe/gloo-ee --version 1.13.0 --untar
   kubectl apply -f gloo-ee/charts/gloo/crds
   # If Gloo Federation is enabled
   kubectl apply -f gloo-ee/charts/gloo-fed/crds
   ```
   {{% /tab %}}
   {{< /tabs >}}

3. Enable any [new features](#features) that you want to use, such as Aerospike integration for rate limiting or Gloo Portal API key external authentication.

4. Continue to [upgrade the Gloo Edge server components]({{% versioned_link_path fromRoot="/operations/upgrading/upgrade_steps/#step-4-upgrade-gloo-edge" %}}) via Helm.
