---
title: 1.12.0+ Upgrade Notice
weight: 39
description: Upgrading to Gloo Edge 1.12.x and Gloo Edge Enterprise 1.12.x
---

Review and apply version-specific changes in Gloo Edge 1.12.x and Gloo Edge Enterprise 1.12.x before upgrading your Gloo Edge installation.

{{% notice warning %}}
New CRDs are automatically applied to your cluster when performing a `helm install` operation.
However, they are not applied when performing an `helm upgrade` operation. This is a [deliberate design choice](https://helm.sh/docs/topics/charts/#limitations-on-crds) on the part of the
Helm maintainers, given the risk associated with changing CRDs. Given this limitation, you must apply new CRDs to the cluster before upgrading.
{{% /notice %}}

## Architectural changes 

To reduce cross-pod communication, the gateway functionality is removed from a standalone pod, and is now included in the Gloo Edge control plane pod. Specifically, the validation webhook is moved to the `gloo` pod, which reduces the number of gRPC calls required for validation.

The following changes apply to your Gloo Edge installation in 1.12.x:
- **Installed pods**: The `gateway` pod is removed from the [set of installed components]({{% versioned_link_path fromRoot="/installation/enterprise/#verify-your-installation" %}}).
- **Installation settings**:
  - The sections of the Helm chart for the gateway deployment and service accounts are removed.
  - Because the `gateway` pod is no longer installed, specify any environment variables for the gateway on the `gloo` deployment instead. For example, in your Helm values file, you might set the `PROXY_STATUS_MAX_SIZE_BYTES` environment variable to truncate the length of the proxy status field:
    ```
    gloo:
      deployment:
        customEnv:
          - name: "PROXY_STATUS_MAX_SIZE_BYTES"
            value: "100"
    ```
  - To improve performance, the proxy CRD is not written to etcd by default and is instead kept in memory. If you must allow external tools and other pods to read the proxy CR contents, you can persist them to etcd by setting the `gateway.persistProxySpec` setting to `true` in your Helm values file. **Important**: If you use the Kubernetes ExternalDNS functionality, you _must_ set the `gateway.persistProxySpec` setting to `true`.
- **Proxy CR contents**: To view the contents of a proxy CR, you can continue to use the `glooctl get proxy <proxy> -o yaml` command. However, because the proxy CRD is no longer written to etcd by default, you cannot use `kubectl` commands to check proxy CR contents.
- **Snapshot metrics**: The `gateway` snapshot is removed. If you use metrics from the gateway snapshot, those metrics are moved to the `gloo` snapshot; for example, `api_gloosnapshot_gloo_solo_io_emitter_*`.

## Helm changes

In Gloo Edge v1.12.0 / Gloo Edge Enterprise v1.12.0 and later, the default Gateways, ExtAuth Upstreams, and RateLimit Upstreams are installed via a Job during the Helm installation and upgrade process, instead of being included directly in the Helm chart. After you upgrade to these versions, those resources no longer have Helm annotations (e.g. `meta.helm.sh/release-name`, `meta.helm.sh/release-namespace`). If you need to roll back to an earlier Gloo Edge version, you must manually add the Helm release annotations back to these resources before performing the rollback.

{{% notice warning %}}
Do not manually edit (e.g. `kubectl apply` or `kubectl edit`) the Gloo Edge custom resources (e.g. Gateways, Upstreams) that are installed with the Helm chart, as this might cause errors in future upgrades.
<br/><br/>
If you already manually edited a resource, verify _before_ you upgrade that the resource's `metadata.annotations.kubectl.kubernetes.io/last-applied-configuration` annotation does not contain a `resourceVersion` field. This field can cause conflicts during the upgrade process.
<br/><br/>
If the field exists, you can remove it in either of the following ways:
- `kubectl edit` the resource and manually delete the `resourceVersion` field from the `metadata.annotations.kubectl.kubernetes.io/last-applied-configuration` annotation, or
- remove the `metadata.annotations.kubectl.kubernetes.io/last-applied-configuration` annotation altogether if not needed, e.g. `kubectl annotate gateway -n gloo-system gateway-proxy kubectl.kubernetes.io/last-applied-configuration-`
{{% /notice %}}

## CRD changes

**New and updated CRDs**
- In the ExtAuth CR, the `spec.configs.oauth2.oidcAuthorizationCode.headers` section is updated to include the `useBearerSchemaForAuthorization` setting to add the “Bearer” prefix to the upstream access token header value (`"Authorization: Bearer <access_token>"`). In Gloo Edge 1.12, this setting defaults to false. In Gloo Edge 1.13, this setting will default to true. For more information, see the [ExtAuth reference documentation]({{% versioned_link_path fromRoot="/reference/api/github.com/solo-io/gloo/projects/gloo/api/v1/enterprise/options/extauth/v1/extauth.proto.sk/#headerconfiguration" %}}).

**Deprecated CRDs**
None

**Removed CRDs**
None

## Upgrade steps

To upgrade Gloo Edge:

1. Follow steps 1 - 2 in [Upgrade Steps]({{% versioned_link_path fromRoot="/operations/upgrading/upgrade_steps/" %}}) to prepare for upgrading, and to upgrade `glooctl`.

2. Apply the new and updated CRDs. Replace the version with the specific patch version that you are upgrading to.

   {{< tabs >}}
   {{% tab name="Gloo Edge" %}}
   ```sh
   helm repo update
   helm pull gloo/gloo --version 1.12.0 --untar
   kubectl apply -f gloo/crds
   ```
   {{% /tab %}}
   {{% tab name="Gloo Edge Enterprise" %}}
   ```sh
   helm repo update
   helm pull glooe/gloo-ee --version 1.12.0 --untar
   kubectl apply -f gloo-ee/charts/gloo/crds
   # If Gloo Federation is enabled
   kubectl apply -f gloo-ee/charts/gloo-fed/crds
   ```
   {{% /tab %}}
   {{< /tabs >}}

3. Prepare for any updates you want to make related to the [gateway architectural changes](#architectural-changes). For example, you might want to create a Helm values file to pass gateway environment variables to the `gloo` pod during the Helm upgrade, or update any systems that watch for snapshot metrics.

4. Continue to [upgrade the Gloo Edge server components]({{% versioned_link_path fromRoot="/operations/upgrading/upgrade_steps/#step-4-upgrade-gloo-edge" %}}) via Helm.

5. If you use the `spec.configs.oauth2.oidcAuthorizationCode.headers.accessTokenHeader: "Authorization"` setting in any `AuthConfig` resources, and you do _not_ want to add the “Bearer” prefix to the header, set `useBearerSchemaForAuthorization` to `false`. If you do not set this setting, it will default to true in Gloo Edge 1.13.
