---
title: "Open Source Gloo Edge"
description: Listing of Helm values for the Open Source Gloo Edge chart
weight: 30
---

The table below describes all the values that you can override in your custom values file when working with the Helm 
chart for Open Source Gloo Edge. More information on using a Helm chart to install the Gloo Edge can be found 
[here]({{% versioned_link_path fromRoot="/installation/gateway/kubernetes/#installing-on-kubernetes-with-helm" %}}).

{{% notice warning %}}
If you are using the **Gloo Edge Enterprise Helm** chart you will need to add a `gloo.` prefix to all the open source Gloo Edge 
chart values. This is due to the fact that the Gloo Edge Enterprise Helm chart uses the open source one as a dependency; 
therefore the sub-chart values have to be prefixed with the name of the sub-chart itself. 
This applies to all values except:

- `global.*`

For example, if you are installing Gloo Edge Enterprise:

- `gateway.certGenJob.enabled` needs to be `gloo.gateway.certGenJob.enabled`

but `global.glooRbac.create` remains the same.
{{% /notice %}}

{{% notice note %}}
If you need further customization of the Helm chart, please read our [advanced customization guide]({{% versioned_link_path fromRoot="/installation/gateway/kubernetes/helm_advanced/" %}}).
{{% /notice %}}

{{< readfile file="reference/values.txt" markdown="true" >}}

## Helm Chart KubeResourceOverrides

Most changes that need to be made to the default helm chart are supported by the helm values above.
However, there may be a case where the helm values do not cover a necessary change.
Helm values which expose the kubernetes API (ie Service, Deployment) now include a `KubeResourceOverride` field.
The following example uses `KubeResourceOverride` to add
labels to a deployment, which is not explicitly implemented in the helm chart:

Gloo deployment:
```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  labels:
    gloo: gloo
  name: gloo
```

We want to add the `resource-owner: infra-team` label to the Deployment. We can do so by specifying the `KubeResourceOverride` in the helm values file:
```yaml
gloo:
  deployment:
    kubeResourceOverride:
      metadata:
        labels:
          resource-owner: infra-team
```

Yaml under the `kubeResourceOverride` is merged in to the deployment yaml, to create the resulting kube resource:
```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  labels:
    gloo: gloo
    resource-owner: infra-team
```

{{% notice note %}}
`kubeResourceOverride` does not support merging in lists, and a list in the override will replace the list in the original resource.
{{% /notice %}}

##### KubeResourceOverride vs Kustomize

[Kustomize](https://kustomize.io/) is another solution for patching resources generated by helm. The following table enumerates differences between the offered solutions.

| Kustomize                                                                                          | Helm KubeResourceOverride                                                                                                          |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| - Finer control over merges, e.g. merging lists <br>- Requires additional files (overlays)<br>- Unsupported in older versions of flux helm operator  | - Can be done only with helm, does not require CI/CD pipeline changes <br>- Specified through values.yaml file or command line arguments |